[Music]
thank you
so without further Ado please join me in
welcoming to the stage doctors
Siddhartha Mukherjee and Adam Rutherford
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you
thank you everyone for coming for a very
special evening to listen to
um Siddhartha Mukherjee SIDS talking
about his brand new book now
um Nicole just mentioned some of the
accolades that that Sid has had over the
last few years but I I want to mention a
few of them again they really are far
too many to list but
um the Emperor of all maladies the
guardian's best first book uh it was a
Pulitzer Prize winner time voted at one
of the hundred most important books of
all time then you read a book called the
gene an intimate history uh New York
Times bestseller
uh then he took some time off and wrote
a short introduction to a book called A
Brief History of everyone who ever lived
which is by me
that wasn't a New York time bestseller
but it did okay
and this is the new one so basically
this is a man who you've got two bearded
Indian men on stage and I've spent quite
a lot of my career trying to emulate him
uh but with little success this is the
new book the song of the cell and it
really is a sort of pioneer song an
elegy about the fundamental basic units
of Life the cell something which I think
is overlooked in in biology in the
popular discourse about biology and
we're going to talk about that you might
have heard us uh chewing the fact on the
start of the week on Monday when we were
talking about this book now we've got a
whole hour to do it we're going to chew
the fat talk for a bit and then we're
going to open it up to the audience we
like audience participation as much as
as possible
um but let me just start with a few
biographical questions because you
people know your work here bestsellers
in the UK as well
um shortlisted for the Royal Society
book prize and the welcome book prize
but maybe they don't know you as well
because you're you live in New York
so why don't you give us a sort of
two-minute potted biography of how you
get from Bengal via Delhi to New York
back to London
well I was my family in bengalia was not
born in Bengal I was born in Delhi and
went to school there
then went to Stanford of all places
um in California as an undergraduate
worked in paulberg's lab which is of
course Very Much part of the the book on
genetics
paulberg first person to do genetic
engineering in the world 1973 Nobel
Prize in 1980 nah a little later
so it's a good lab anyway the pointers
yeah
um then came I was a Rhodes scholar came
to Oxford and was there for three years
studied Immunology with Alan Townsend
who's in this book
um is a close friend Paul's also through
Saint Paul's 90. I'm having dinner with
him next week
um
and
um so uh
Paul loves to have bets and every every
time I see him he he has a bet with me
about something or the other and could
be something completely random
um and and the the loser takes the
winner out to dinner and this has been
going on for 10 years but anyway so
paulberg then came to Allen Townsend
Allentown wait I want to know what the
bets are
and who's winning well this time
actually I won
um that was actually interesting bet the
BET was that the Nobel Prize for the
discovery of crispr
would be either awarded just to Jennifer
doudna and Emmanuel charpentier who are
actually close friends of mine versus it
would be split three ways because
there's an option of spinning in three
ways
um to someone else and Paul chose the
three so he had a Winner's Advantage
because it could be anyone and I said
just Jennifer and the I I thought that
the discovery was was so momentous it
would be just Jennifer and Emmanuel
um and I won but now you have to pay for
dinner in Oxford no no he has to pay for
this oh because you won yeah he has to
pay for dinner right exactly so so
anyway back to biography
um I so then I went I was at um I was at
Stanford and came to Oxford desert road
scholar
um lived in office for three years
worked with Alan
um then went to Harvard Medical School
where I trained in medicine first
um
uh ran the emergency room for about six
months which was a frightening
experience uh I think more frightening
for the patients than for me
um and then
um did my fellowship in cancer biology
cancer medicine but I had already had my
PhD from Oxford so I was an immunologist
by training and so after all of that
launched my own laboratory at Columbia
where I teach and write and do various
other things it's kind of revolting how
over qualified you you are well I
suppose it can be revolting but it
didn't feel revolting when I was
doing those things and so so in order to
get to this book Let's just quickly go
go through the other the other two books
so as you all are a cancer specialist
you're an oncologist you're a practicing
doctor to this day when you're not
writing best-selling books but
um the first book The Emperor of all
maladies which was a huge Mega
International bestseller that is the
subtitle is a biography of of cancer so
what was it that's that that you wanted
to explore in your field as an expert
you know just some extent the emperor
was a um was
written because it wasn't there
when I mean obviously we're living in an
age of cancer I mean the word appears
every day in the in in every newspaper
and
um when you look around when I looked
around this was
um in 2000 when I started writing the
book was 2006.
um when I looked around there was no
history of it
um where had it come from where were we
going and it was inspired by a patient's
question she said
um and she was asking a question about
her own Journey she said
um how did I get here and where am I
going
um but if you take that question very
broadly and think about how did we get
here and where are we going it becomes
The improval Melodies it becomes that
book and so
um that was the inspiration for for that
book it was a it was that that book was
trying to fill a void
um and to some extent the gene also was
trying to fill a void because it seemed
to me that there had been of course very
very good books on on on genetics before
but it had but that sort of lapsed
um in the post
um what I would call the post-genomic
era in the era of sequencing whole
genomes and and crispr and all the vast
landscape of both therapeutic and
ethical issues that were that had been
brought up by that
um and there there was also I think
um which you know very well from your
most recent book
um there was also a um
um
a lack
um we were just talking about this a
lack of
um understanding of the of the very
complex and potentially
um
discomforting
birth of genetics human genetics in
particular which is through Eugenics and
golden and others that you mentioned in
your in your new book
um and it was as if that part of the
history had been erased and um genetics
all of a sudden sprang like you know out
of Zeus's head in in you know
1920 or something like that when in fact
its Origins are very much in the pre-war
era
um with
um a very uh uncomfortable history of of
of the idea of human selection and human
genetics so genetics filled that void
and we'll just talk about the void that
this book fills as well yeah well I
think one of the things that is a common
theme in all three books is that you
write from the perspective of a
scientist and a science historian but
also as a clinician and that I think is
is kind of unique to your work that that
so many of the themes that are well
obviously in a book about cancer it's
about patients but in the gene it also
relates to disease and treating patients
and in this book and the song of the
cell as well a lot of it's the history
which I find abs really fascinating
um and and teach them have studied
myself but then there's this other
dimension to it which is how the history
and the basic science and the genetics
how that actually
relates to
patience to disease yes and I think the
the important thing in these books well
first of all I should say that the books
are written
if one were to reread the books and
eventually I hope they'll be compiled
into a quartet if there's a quartet
there's a book after this
um I'm only saying that because
um when the emperor won the guardian
book prize
um there was a snarky review that said
um this should have been called The
Guardian only book prize because he's
done with anything he has to ever write
um but that was not the case obviously
but
um
um but all of that said
I think I make in all three books
um in fact the gene probably should come
first
um because it is of course this
single smallest unit of information uh
the code
um the cell probably comes next and
Emperor comes last because it's about
when cells go wrong and Physiology gets
affected
um so that's one important piece
but I think
probably the most important
idea that runs through these books and
I've introduce it early in the
conversation is the distinction between
disease and desire
um
and that's very important for me as a
thinker but also important for us as a
society and also important for me as a
clinician and as a doctor because
we have drawn historically very strong
boundaries between disease and desire
and out by it's quite obviously I'll
explain a little bit anyway but disease
of course is is is fundamentally linked
to the idea of suffering and
and we have understood disease
for Generations since the beginning of
of human history
um desire is is linked to some idea of
enhancement or augmentation something
that we cannot do that we wanted to do
and
I I would suggest that really for
centuries these lines were relatively
easily drawn the line between disease
and desire
um but now as we invade uh biology uh
with more and more
Precision but but more and more audacity
I think these lines are being rapidly
blurred
um and that's why I think these books
need to enter the conversation because
um because those lines are
extraordinarily important to draw and if
you don't draw them I think you know
many things that we understand about the
world will change and perhaps not for
the better okay well let's let's talk
about the song Let's get really stuck
into it because that's why you're here
and that's that's the book that we're
talking about
um we will get to during the course of
this conversation we want to talk about
the therapies and yes and the desires
and all of those things that you've just
mentioned but let's let's talk about the
history because the history is
fascinating but even before we get to
that
I think we should establish some ground
rules about what we mean when we're
talking about cells because I know we
have spent a lot of Our Lives staring at
these pretty often pretty unremarkable
sort of translucent Globs down
microscopes and maybe you did when you I
don't know sliced up an onion at GCSE
biology or did some hematology or
something like that and I don't know
they look they they can be pretty
unremarkable and yet
they are the basic unit of life full of
diversity active cities buzzing with
action they are where life exists and I
think you made a very important Point
both in your program and just now which
is that
that is absolutely true but bizarrely
enough they've been sort of neglected
um I wouldn't say what's not neglected
in literature in the scientific
literature on a cell biologist but but
if you if you
um I I was walking past
I told you this on the program a
Brazilian Botox Clinic called life I
wasn't getting Botox but
um but really
and and it had a picture of DNA on it
um so every time you go through anything
that's called life you know a magazine
cover on life etc etc it'll have the
iconic double helix on it
um but of course the the G which is the
you know DNA contains the information
for genetics for genes
but what's interesting and what you
realize quite obviously when you think
about it DNA is a molecule it doesn't
it's lifeless it is not life it is only
brought to life by a cell a cell
interprets DNA in the same way that a
musician interprets a score a score is
not music it's the musician playing the
music that is music hence the song of
the cell but
um but but
um so it's a cell that really where is
where life begins in some ways if you
want to think about life and we I
thought you put it very nicely in the
program
they're really three foundational pieces
of all biology and by foundational
pieces they are so Universal that they
that they span the entire biological
universe as we know it
um the number one being the universality
of genetic of the genetic code and and
genetics
um there are variations on the theme but
essentially the universality of it the
second is cell theory the fact that all
organisms regardless of whether you're
an elephant or a bacterium are you made
of a cell and the third of course is
evolution now Evolution has a thousand
books written on it genetics says two
thousand books are not including mine
what's interesting is that there wasn't
or there really isn't a kind of similar
book about the importance of the third
pillar of of our life
so unremarkable remarkable as it is the
cell is remarkable it is the it is the
smallest living unit of life and that
thing you saw that blob you saw
under a microscope or a much more
complex cell like the one that lives in
your brain
does things uh it's the actor it's the
doer it's the maker
um sometimes the teacher that's
responsible for for everything that that
we do or be or our our whole being
um and so therefore I mean you're
exactly right I mean what looks
sometimes unremarkable is really the
center of all being right there is